I am very much obliged to you for so full an account of Mr. H.'s opinions; you have set them down as exactly as if you had been taking evidence, and I have laughed over the whole twice. Pray do not suppose me wounded. I bear him no ill-will for a mind so unlike my own; I had far rather be found dull by a man of decided opinions than praised by a man of none. What amazes me is you. You pressed him — twice by your own showing, and a third time with the second volume in your hand — and never changed colour. Your father is right and I am of his party: it was not fair play. He has been criticising a book to the very family that owns it, and when he learns whose it is, as he must, he will be mortified past bearing, and will think of it in church.

But that is you all over, Sophy. You will not walk into a room where there is company you do not know, nor ask William for a candle without begging his pardon; and yet you will sit down opposite a grave gentleman of five-and-thirty and take his judgment to pieces upon a subject he has thought of all his life, and not be put off. Now attend to me. You are to force no more of the books upon him — none; not the third volume, nor by leaving it about — you are to tell him fairly whose they are, and you are to say that you are sorry. That is the whole of the penance I shall set you.

For the rest, he and I should never agree. We should differ about novels, and a great deal more about heroines. Faultless people put me out of humour and out of health together; I have never been able to keep my temper with a young lady who has none to lose. And yet much of what he said is very sensible; the part I liked best had nothing to do with me — his wishing to think well of young women, and being sorry when a book invites him not to. That is a kind mind, and a fine-grained one, and deserves better reading than mine. I ought to tell you, since you will have it from Uncle T. otherwise, that he has found out there is another finished and going to the press. He asked me directly, and I never can deny anything asked directly; but he knows no more, and you are to leave him so. Do not look to be pleased by it. The heroine may do for you; she is a great deal too good for my taste, and I suspect she and I were never on comfortable terms.

Of myself there is little to tell. I have been unwell these six weeks; about this day se'nnight I was worse, the fever coming back at night and my sleep very broken, and Mr. L.'s draughts doing less for me than sleep would have done. I am better since, and my face has left off being blotched and wrong-coloured; though I must not reckon upon ever looking well again, and at my age one cannot afford the luxury of being ill — it is an indulgence for girls of two-and-twenty, who can spare the time. Your letters are the best physic in the house, and my pleasure in them is not abated by a grain. And Miss B. will have the curate before Michaelmas twelvemonth, say what she may.

Friday, evening.

I was poor company yesterday and you must forgive it; I had no more spirit than a wet glove. We are promised rain, and then mild weather, which will suit me, for my saddle is nearly finished and I am persuaded that air and exercise are all I want. There is low water in the house besides, on account of what is expected at Stanton; nothing is settled, nothing can be settled, and your Grandmama sits over it hour after hour, grieving at what cannot be mended and puzzling at conduct nobody living can make out.

From the other quarter the news is better. Little C.'s headaches have quite left her; Dr. P. is pleased with the mercury and speaks of a cure as possible, and they hold now that the complaint is curable if the patient be young enough. I send it as fresh, though I dare say your own Mr. G. has told you as much; and I hope his credit stands up against Tom's cough, which has lasted a great while for a boy of his colour.

Tell Charles that William continues as handsome and as obliging as ever, and dined here on Thursday, and that I play at spillikins nearly every evening on purpose to think of him. The N.s are come back from Weymouth; I have not seen them, as I do not venture to church. We have engaged a new maid who is to be housekeeper as well, which sounds economical and will not be. Old Palmer was buried on Wednesday. I said to the sexton that it had been a handsome funeral, and he said, "Well, ma'am, you are the first as has said so," which I take to be conclusive. The only handsome thing about it was the boy walking behind in a green coat, the widow following as chief mourner in short mourning stuff trimmed with crape.

Sunday.

After turning over every plan I have settled on sending this by Uncle T. to be put in at London, out of pure curiosity to see how the postmark will look. He hates London and finds it oppressive, and I shall miss him more than I mean to tell him; but he will be there in time to visit the sick as conscientiously as he does everything else. He came back from Wykeham on Friday, having had a pleasant day with the M.s — a visit not likely to be repeated these six months. I hope your Mr. F. is safely across to France. I have had my first ride: past the ground where the new cottages are to stand, with Anne and your Aunt walking one on each side of me, and Anne the most untiring nurse that ever wore out a pair of shoes. But you know all this already.
