To illustrate our recommendations, we present a case study covering work on African-American English (AAE). Work analyzing “bias” in the context of AAE has shown that part-of-speech taggers, language identification systems, and dependency parsers all work less well on text containing features associated with AAE than on text without these features, and that toxicity detection systems score tweets containing features associated with AAE as more offensive than tweets without them.

These papers have been critical for highlighting AAE as a language variety for which existing NLP systems may not work, illustrating their limitations. However, they do not conceptualize “racial bias” in the same way. The first four of these papers simply focus on system performance differences between text containing features associated with AAE and text without these features. In contrast, the last two papers also focus on such system performance differences, but motivate this focus with the following additional reasoning: If tweets containing features associated with AAE are scored as more offensive than tweets without these features, then this might (a) yield negative perceptions of AAE; (b) result in disproportionate removal of tweets containing these features, impeding participation in online platforms and reducing the space available online in which speakers can use AAE freely; and (c) cause AAE speakers to incur additional costs if they have to change their language practices to avoid negative perceptions or tweet removal.

More importantly, none of these papers engage with the literature on AAE, racial hierarchies in the U.S., and raciolinguistic ideologies. By failing to engage with this literature—thereby treating AAE simply as one of many non-Penn Treebank varieties of English or perhaps as another challenging domain—work analyzing “bias” in NLP systems in the context of AAE fails to situate these systems in the world. Who are the speakers of AAE? How are they viewed? We argue that AAE as a language variety cannot be separated from its speakers—primarily Black people in the U.S., who experience systemic anti-Black racism—and the language ideologies that reinforce and justify racial hierarchies.

Even after decades of sociolinguistic efforts to legitimize AAE, it continues to be viewed as “bad” English and its speakers continue to be viewed as linguistically inadequate—a view called the deficit perspective. This perspective persists despite demonstrations that AAE is rule-bound and grammatical, in addition to ample evidence of its speakers’ linguistic adroitness. This perspective belongs to a broader set of raciolinguistic ideologies, which also produce allocational harms; speakers of AAE are frequently penalized for not adhering to dominant language practices, including in the education system, when seeking housing, and in the judicial system, where their testimony is misunderstood or, worse yet, disbelieved. These raciolinguistic ideologies position racialized communities as needing linguistic intervention, such as language education programs, in which these and other harms can be reduced if communities accommodate to dominant language practices.

Engaging with the literature outlined above situates the system behaviors that are described as “bias,” providing a foundation for normative reasoning. Researchers and practitioners should be concerned about “racial bias” in toxicity detection systems not only because performance differences impair system performance, but because they reproduce longstanding injustices of stigmatization and disenfranchisement for speakers of AAE. In re-stigmatizing AAE, they reproduce language ideologies in which AAE is viewed as ungrammatical, uneducated, and offensive. These ideologies, in turn, enable linguistic discrimination and justify enduring racial hierarchies. Our perspective, which understands racial hierarchies and raciolinguistic ideologies as structural conditions that govern the development and deployment of technology, implies that techniques for measuring or mitigating “bias” in NLP systems will necessarily be incomplete unless they interrogate and dismantle these structural conditions, including the power relations between technologists and racialized communities.

We emphasize that engaging with the literature on AAE, racial hierarchies in the U.S., and raciolinguistic ideologies can generate new lines of engagement. These lines include work on the ways that the decisions made during the development and deployment of NLP systems produce stigmatization and disenfranchisement, and work on AAE use in practice, such as the ways that speakers of AAE interact with NLP systems that were not designed for them. This literature can also help researchers and practitioners address the allocational harms that may be produced by NLP systems, and ensure that even well-intentioned NLP systems do not position racialized communities as needing linguistic intervention or accommodation to dominant language practices. Finally, researchers and practitioners wishing to design better systems can also draw on a growing body of work on anti-racist language pedagogy that challenges the deficit perspective of AAE and other racialized language practices, as well as the work that we described in section 4.3 on reimagining the power relations between technologists and communities affected by technology.
