Trophic ecology is thought to be a strong driver of morphological diversification in teleost fishes, with shifts to novel behaviors and prey items exerting differential selective pressures on feeding morphologies and performance. Within the skull of teleostean fishes, the neurocranium and mandible play important roles in prey capture and processing. As a result, these structures have become widely used models for ecomorphological studies linking the shape and ecological performance of musculo-skeletal structures. Studies estimating the mechanical performance of the mandible in particular have shown that variation in mechanical advantage is tightly linked to variation in trophic ecology and resource use. Species with higher mechanical advantages have been shown to feed on harder prey items while species with lower mechanical advantages have been shown to feed on more evasive prey.

While mechanical performance is expected to closely track resource utilization, the relationship between underlying morphologies and resource utilization is less predictable. This lack of predictability may be due in part to functional redundancy, or “many-to-one mapping”. Functional redundancy occurs when several different underlying morphologies are capable of producing similar performance outputs. The four-bar linkage system that powers jaw protrusion in teleost fishes is a widely-cited example of a functionally redundant system. In this system, differing linkage lengths can produce similar performance outputs, which themselves, often, more closely track measures of trophic ecology. This functional redundancy may therefore weaken the relationship between morphology and resource use.

Here we study the relationships among trophic morphology, mechanical performance, and trophic ecology in Navajini, a clade of riverine-adapted Neotropical electric fishes (Gymnotiformes: Teleostei). Gymnotiform fishes are a moderately diverse (∼300 spp.) clade of weakly electric fishes which exhibit elongate eel-like bodies and all possess elongate anal fins for use in a specialized form of locomotion. In addition to their derived body shapes, gymnotiform fishes also exhibit a diversity of skull shapes and trophic ecologies, ranging from fishes with elongate tube-snouts that probe the substrate and interstitial spaces to extract aquatic invertebrates, to brachycephalic piscivores who feed primarily on scales and tails of other electric fishes. Gymnotiformes have been the subject of several recent studies examining the developmental and evolutionary history of the skull and oral jaws. However, to date, only a handful of studies have examined the relationships between morphology and trophic ecology in gymnotiform fishes, and none have incorporated performance estimates or examined these relationships within a rigorous phylogenetic framework. The Navajini (Gymnotiformes: Apteronotidae) is a clade adapted to inhabit the deep channels (>5 m depth at mid-channel) of large, lowland Amazonian rivers.

In addition to high levels of trophic diversity, Navajine fishes also inhabit a temporally variable aquatic environment in the Amazonian river channel, which can dramatically affect their foraging strategies. During the course of the annual hydrological cycle, the river and surrounding floodplains experience dramatic seasonal variation in water levels. During the period of high-water, rivers flood their banks and expand into the surrounding floodplain forest habitats, bringing fishes into contact with abundant allochthonous resources (e.g., terrestrial arthropods and fruits). During the low-water period, fishes lose contact with the floodplain and are restricted to habitats of the main river channels. As fishes become concentrated in river channels their densities increase (per unit surface area). As levels of dissolved oxygen decrease and water quality deteriorates, interactions between species intensify as species compete for limited resources. During this period, some Neotropical fishes have been shown to exhibit facultative lepidophagy (scale-feeding); presumably to exploit the increased fish densities in the restricted river channels, and switch to invertivory during high water periods. This seasonal variation in habitat quality and availability exerts strong selective pressures on species that inhabit large rivers and floodplains of lowland Amazonia. Species that inhabit these habitats must either specialize on exploiting resources during a particular period of the seasonal variation (e.g., invertivory and lepidophagy), or adapt to exploit a variety of resources (e.g., generalist) as they change in relative availability.

In this study, we investigate the relationship between skull morphology, performance, and trophic ecology. We implement an integrative approach, combining three-dimensional geometric morphometrics, biomechanics, stable isotope analysis, gut-content analysis, and phylogenetic comparative methods to model the ecomorphological interactions of the morphology, mechanical performance, and trophic ecology of 11 species of Navajine electric fishes. We fit these data to alternative models of trait evolution to test the hypothesis of performance evolution via stabilizing selection at a single trait optimum, multiple trait optima, or a neutral drift model.

We hypothesize that skull shape and mandible performance closely predict trophic ecology. We further hypothesize that species evolve to specialize on specific trophic resources, resulting in the evolution of distinct performance strategies in the Amazon River.
