The main result regarding myth belief and fact belief change was that participants updated their beliefs in accordance with the information received: affirmations increased fact beliefs, and refutations reduced myth beliefs. There was no evidence of motivated reasoning, and in fact, refutations reduced beliefs in myths more strongly if the myths came from a supported politician—that is, when there was congruence between the party affiliation of the participant and the politician (as discussed earlier, this counter-motivational effect was driven mainly by left-wing participants). The main result regarding politician support was that support decreased when mostly false statements were fact-checked (the 4:1 condition) but not when participants received an identical number of facts and myths (the 4:4 condition).

The finding that pre-existing attitudes did not moderate belief change appears consistent with the attitude-protection hypothesis—that is, that motivated rejection of corrections occurs only for corrections which directly challenge strong attitudes. While we used real statements from Shorten and Turnbull, we did not ensure that these statements reflected positions typically associated with each politician's party. Even if they happened to do so, participants may not have shared their preferred party's positions regarding the specific issues addressed. Thus, it is unlikely that all of the fact-checks in the present study directly challenged strongly held convictions.

Future studies could contrast the impact of fact-checks relating to trivial or obscure topics with the impact of fact-checks relating to topics that are important and central to a politician's platform, while measuring participants' topic-specific attitudes. If attitude effects were found when strong beliefs are challenged, this would both support the attitude-protection hypothesis and reveal a limitation to fact-checking's effectiveness under such conditions.

There was no evidence that right-wing individuals showed stronger motivated reasoning or were any more likely to persist believing in inaccurate information. However, as noted, the fact-checks used in this study were unlikely to challenge strong beliefs. The processing of such fact-checks may be unaffected by variables—such as dogmatism, need for closure and sensitivity to threat—on which conservatives tend to score high. Thus, the argument that motivated reasoning is often stronger among right-wing people—due to their higher levels of those three traits —would not necessarily apply under the present conditions.

While neither left- nor right-wing participants showed evidence of bias in changing their beliefs, the left-wing group appeared somewhat biased in their initial beliefs: initial belief was higher for statements from the preferred compared to the non-preferred politician. It should be noted in this context that the present study sacrificed some experimental control in order to use real statements from real politicians. Thus, it is possible that left-wing participants' apparent greater bias resulted from differences between the statements and politicians. For example, it may be that Turnbull is generally considered less credible than Shorten by partisans of both stripes, thus inflating the apparent bias of left-wing participants and deflating that of right-wing participants. Additionally, the two politicians held different positions—Turnbull was the prime minister at the time of testing, while Shorten was the leader of the opposition—which could have affected the results, for example, if the public generally applies higher standards to office holders and views them with greater scepticism than opposition leaders. Of course, statements differed, too, so the apparent asymmetry may have been caused by such idiosyncrasies.

The effects of fact-checking on support differed with the ratio of true and false statements. When there was an equal number of myths and facts, support was unaffected by fact-checking. Moreover, balanced fact-checking had no impact on measures of support even when participants evaluated non-preferred politicians; these results can thus not be explained by motivated reasoning, which would only prevent a decline in attitudes towards preferred politicians. Rather, a balanced sample of true and false statements may simply not substantially change the available evidence base or violate expectations. By contrast, when fact-checks involved primarily myths (four myths but only one fact), participants’ support did decline, despite the absence of attitude effects on belief change, and irrespective of whether the politician was from a participant's preferred party. It seems most likely that this change in support was caused by the cumulative impact of evidence that the politician made many incorrect statements, with perceived veracity affecting voting intentions via an impact on participants' feelings towards the respective politician. Thus, it appears that veracity does matter to voters, but that perceived veracity will be unaffected by a balance of positive and negative fact-checks.
