Discrimination literally consists of making a distinction, treating individuals or groups differently. However, differentiation becomes discrimination when it is based on unjustified or illegal criteria.

In practice, discrimination involves differentiated treatment of individuals who are in comparable situations, on the basis of at least one unlawful criterion. Eurostat surveys reveal that the feeling of discrimination is more widespread than actual discrimination.

Popular and practised on a voluntary basis, sport can make virtually unique contributions to building bridges and getting through to marginalised and alienated groups where other schemes have failed. Conversely, competitive sport can also be viewed as a form of differentiation, dividing and ranking participants according to their level of performance, age and gender. Nevertheless, it is generally accepted that sport provides a level playing field for participants, by bringing together athletes from different (geographical, cultural, religious and social) backgrounds to compete against one another, obeying the same rules, and in the same institutional and ethical framework, all coming together in a single 'sporting community'. What is more, 64 % of EU citizens regard sport as a means of combating discrimination.

However, sport's ethical principles are often stretched. Based on physical performance, competitive sport not only offers men and women differing opportunities (and prize money), it also separates athletes with disabilities from those without. Regrettably, women remain under-represented in coaching and managerial positions in sport. The International Olympic Committee currently numbers 33 female members and honorary members out of a total of 144. Moreover, fewer than 20 % of the members of the governing structures of affiliated bodies are women. Similarly, in 2015 only 14 % of all top decision-making positions in individual EU sports federations were occupied by women. It has also been estimated that only 20 % to 30 % of all sports coaches in Europe are women.

This shows that the universality of sport is not always confirmed in the day-to-day practice and management of sports institutions and that sport continues to be affected by a number of specific instances of discrimination.

Although there are some variations, discrimination in sport very frequently involves stigmatisation on the basis of external characteristics such as skin colour, body shape and gender.

It is also important to make a clear distinction between deliberate discrimination (in sports clubs, at sports venues, etc.) and the feeling of being discriminated against, which some individuals and communities may experience more strongly than others (foreigners, gay, lesbian or trans people, etc.). In addition, discrimination is very often cumulative, particularly for economic migrants, despite the widely-held view that immigrants are more easily integrated through sport.

Recent statistics on discrimination in sport are difficult to find. However, according to a 2017 FRA 'Minorities and Discrimination Survey', 3 % of respondents had experienced racist violence in the previous year, with another 24 % having been exposed to racist harassment in that period. Nearly half (47 %) of Jewish respondents worried about falling victim to an anti-Semitic verbal insult or harassment, while over one third (40 %) were concerned about being physically attacked in public spaces.

Worryingly, hate-motivated violence and harassment often go unreported. According to the 2018 FRA survey 'Being Black in the EU', for example, 64 % of victims of racist violence did not report the most recent incident they experienced to the police or any other organisation or service.

A 2018 survey offers data on experiences of discrimination related to LGBTQI+ sexual orientation and gender identity in different fields of sport in the EU. Its findings illustrate that the vast majority of respondents (90 %) perceive homo-/transphobia to be a problem in sport, with gay men feeling homophobia to be a bigger problem than lesbian/gay women and bisexual people. Indeed, 82 % of those polled had witnessed homo-/transphobic language in sport in the previous 12 months. Similarly, almost one in five respondents had refrained from participating in a sport that they felt attracted to as a result of their sexual orientation and/or gender identity. This was most frequently the case for trans people wishing to practice football, dancing, swimming, and boxing. While 16 % of respondents practising sports had had at least one negative experience relating to their sexual orientation in the previous 12 months, trans people experienced negative incidents disproportionally more often.

Verbal insults (82 %) and negative experiences of a physical nature were most widespread. Over one third had experienced abuse 'physically crossing the line' (36 %) – i.e. being shoved and/or pushed – and one fifth had been a victim of physical violence (20 %). Harassment via social media, messengers or webpages (e-bullying) had been experienced by 40 %.

Although the perpetrators varied, in most cases they were other sports participants (53 %) or team members (49 %). Lesbian/gay women and bisexual people mentioned their own team members most frequently as perpetrators, whereas gay men and people with other sexual orientations indicated other sports participants as the most common offenders. Trans people were more frequently harassed by coaches.

In cases where respondents had endured a homo-/transphobic incident, they predominantly chose not to react at all (53 %). Only a quarter confronted their abuser(s) and very few reported the case (8 %). Reasons for not reporting were complex and manifold. However, almost half of the respondents doubted that an effective intervention could be expected.

The results further revealed that nearly 40 % of respondents did not know of any organisation or individual to contact to report negative experiences. The organisations they were aware of were primarily outside of organised sport.

Asked to consider what would constitute appropriate measures to tackle discrimination and/or harassment in sport based on sexual orientation and/or gender identity, respondents opted first for 'encouraging more sports stars to come out' (71 %) and 'setting up high profile anti-homophobia/transphobia campaigns' (70 %), followed by diversity training sessions (63 %) and more inclusive policies (52 %). It is interesting to note that one third (36 %) considered tougher sanctions appropriate.
