In the course of a day’s walk, you see, there is much variance in the
mood.  From the exhilaration of the start, to the happy phlegm of the
arrival, the change is certainly great.  As the day goes on, the
traveller moves from the one extreme towards the other.  He becomes more
and more incorporated with the material landscape, and the open-air
drunkenness grows upon him with great strides, until he posts along the
road, and sees everything about him, as in a cheerful dream.  The first
is certainly brighter, but the second stage is the more peaceful.  A man
does not make so many articles towards the end, nor does he laugh aloud;
but the purely animal pleasures, the sense of physical wellbeing, the
delight of every inhalation, of every time the muscles tighten down the
thigh, console him for the absence of the others, and bring him to his
destination still content.

Nor must I forget to say a word on bivouacs.  You come to a milestone on
a hill, or some place where deep ways meet under trees; and off goes the
knapsack, and down you sit to smoke a pipe in the shade.  You sink into
yourself, and the birds come round and look at you; and your smoke
dissipates upon the afternoon under the blue dome of heaven; and the sun
lies warm upon your feet, and the cool air visits your neck and turns
aside your open shirt.  If you are not happy, you must have an evil
conscience.  You may dally as long as you like by the roadside.  It is
almost as if the millennium were arrived, when we shall throw our clocks
and watches over the housetop, and remember time and seasons no more.
Not to keep hours for a lifetime is, I was going to say, to live for
ever.  You have no idea, unless you have tried it, how endlessly long is
a summer’s day, that you measure out only by hunger, and bring to an end
only when you are drowsy.  I know a village where there are hardly any
clocks, where no one knows more of the days of the week than by a sort of
instinct for the fête on Sundays, and where only one person can tell you
the day of the month, and she is generally wrong; and if people were
aware how slow Time journeyed in that village, and what armfuls of spare
hours he gives, over and above the bargain, to its wise inhabitants, I
believe there would be a stampede out of London, Liverpool, Paris, and a
variety of large towns, where the clocks lose their heads, and shake the
hours out each one faster than the other, as though they were all in a
wager.  And all these foolish pilgrims would each bring his own misery
along with him, in a watch-pocket!  It is to be noticed, there were no
clocks and watches in the much-vaunted days before the flood.  It
follows, of course, there were no appointments, and punctuality was not
yet thought upon.  “Though ye take from a covetous man all his treasure,”
says Milton, “he has yet one jewel left; ye cannot deprive him of his
covetousness.”  And so I would say of a modern man of business, you may
do what you will for him, put him in Eden, give him the elixir of life—he
has still a flaw at heart, he still has his business habits.  Now, there
is no time when business habits are more mitigated than on a walking
tour.  And so during these halts, as I say, you will feel almost free.

But it is at night, and after dinner, that the best hour comes.  There
are no such pipes to be smoked as those that follow a good day’s march;
the flavour of the tobacco is a thing to be remembered, it is so dry and
aromatic, so full and so fine.  If you wind up the evening with grog, you
will own there was never such grog; at every sip a jocund tranquillity
spreads about your limbs, and sits easily in your heart.  If you read a
book—and you will never do so save by fits and starts—you find the
language strangely racy and harmonious; words take a new meaning; single
sentences possess the ear for half an hour together; and the writer
endears himself to you, at every page, by the nicest coincidence of
sentiment.  It seems as if it were a book you had written yourself in a
dream.  To all we have read on such occasions we look back with special
favour.  “It was on the 10th of April, 1798,” says Hazlitt, with amorous
precision, “that I sat down to a volume of the new Héloïse, at the Inn
at Llangollen, over a bottle of sherry and a cold chicken.”  I should
wish to quote more, for though we are mighty fine fellows nowadays, we
cannot write like Hazlitt.  And, talking of that, a volume of Hazlitt’s
essays would be a capital pocket-book on such a journey; so would a
volume of Heine’s songs; and for Tristram Shandy I can pledge a fair
experience.

If the evening be fine and warm, there is nothing better in life than to
lounge before the inn door in the sunset, or lean over the parapet of the
bridge, to watch the weeds and the quick fishes.  It is then, if ever,
that you taste Joviality to the full significance of that audacious word.
Your muscles are so agreeably slack, you feel so clean and so strong and
so idle, that whether you move or sit still, whatever you do is done with
pride and a kingly sort of pleasure.  You fall in talk with any one, wise
or foolish, drunk or sober.  And it seems as if a hot walk purged you,
more than of anything else, of all narrowness and pride, and left
curiosity to play its part freely, as in a child or a man of science.
You lay aside all your own hobbies, to watch provincial humours develop
themselves before you, now as a laughable farce, and now grave and
beautiful like an old tale.
