The creation of this PEP was prompted primarily by the aging SSL support in the Python 2 series. As of March 2014, the Python 2.7 SSL module is approaching four years of age, and the SSL support in the still popular Python 2.6 release had its feature set locked six years ago.

These are simply too old to provide a foundation that can be recommended in good conscience for secure networking software that operates over the public internet, especially in an era where it is becoming quite clearly evident that advanced persistent security threats are even more widespread and more indiscriminate in their targeting than had previously been understood. While they represented reasonable security infrastructure in their time, the state of the art has moved on, and we need to investigate mechanisms for effectively providing more up to date network security infrastructure for users that, for whatever reason, are not currently in a position to migrate to Python 3.

While the use of the system OpenSSL installation addresses many of these concerns on Linux platforms, it doesn't address all of them (in particular, it is still difficult for sotware to explicitly require some higher level security settings). The standard library support can be bypassed by using a third party library like PyOpenSSL or Pycurl, but this still results in a security problem, as these can be difficult dependencies to deploy, and many users will remain unaware that they might want them. Rather than explaining to potentially naive users how to obtain and use these libraries, it seems better to just fix the included batteries.

In the case of the binary installers for Windows and Mac OS X that are published on python.org, the version of OpenSSL used is entirely within the control of the Python core development team, but is currently limited to OpenSSL maintenance releases for the version initially shipped with the corresponding Python feature release.

With increased popularity comes increased responsibility, and this proposal aims to acknowledge the fact that Python's popularity and adoption is at a sufficiently high level that some of our design and policy decisions have significant implications beyond the Python development community.

As one example, the Python 2 ssl module does not support the Server Name Indication standard. While it is possible to obtain SNI support by using the third party requests client library, actually doing so currently requires using not only requests and its embedded dependencies, but also half a dozen or more additional libraries. The lack of support in the Python 2 series thus serves as an impediment to making effective use of SNI on servers, as Python 2 clients will frequently fail to handle it correctly.

Another more critical example is the lack of SSL hostname matching in the Python 2 standard library - it is currently necessary to rely on a third party library, such as requests or backports.ssl_match_hostname to obtain that functionality in Python 2.

The Python 2 series also remains more vulnerable to remote timing attacks on security sensitive comparisons than the Python 3 series, as it lacks a standard library equivalent to the timing attack resistant hmac.compare_digest() function. While appropriate secure comparison functions can be implemented in third party extensions, many users don't even consider the issue and use ordinary equality comparisons instead - while a standard library solution doesn't automatically fix that problem, it does make the barrier to resolution much lower once the problem is pointed out.

Python 2.7 represents the only long term maintenance release the core development team has provided, and it is natural that there will be things that worked over a historically shorter maintenance lifespan that don't work over this longer support period. In the specific case of the problem described in this PEP, the simplest available solution is to acknowledge that long term maintenance of network security related modules requires the ability to add new features, even while retaining backwards compatibility for existing interfaces.

For those familiar with it, it is worth comparing the approach described in this PEP with Red Hat's handling of its long term open source support commitments: it isn't the RHEL 6.0 release itself that receives 10 years worth of support, but the overall RHEL 6 series. The individual RHEL 6.x point releases within the series then receive a wide variety of new features, including security enhancements, all while meeting strict backwards compatibility guarantees for existing software. The proposal covered in this PEP brings our approach to long term maintenance more into line with this precedent - we retain our strict backwards compatibility requirements, but make an exception to the restriction against adding new features.

To date, downstream redistributors have respected our upstream policy of "no new features in Python maintenance releases". This PEP explicitly accepts that a more nuanced policy is appropriate in the case of network security related features, and the specific change it describes is deliberately designed such that it is potentially suitable for Red Hat Enterprise Linux and its downstream derivatives.

The key requirement for a feature to be considered for inclusion in this proposal was that it must have security implications beyond the specific application that is written in Python and the system that application is running on. Thus the focus on network security protocols, password storage and related cryptographic infrastructure - Python is a popular choice for the development of web services and clients, and thus the capabilities of widely used Python versions have implications for the security design of other services that may themselves be using newer versions of Python or other development languages, but need to interoperate with clients or servers written using older versions of Python.

The intent behind this requirement was to minimise any impact that the introduction of this policy may have on the stability and compatibility of maintenance releases, while still addressing some key security concerns relating to the particular aspects of Python 2.7. It would be thoroughly counterproductive if end users became as cautious about updating to new Python 2.7 maintenance releases as they are about updating to new feature releases within the same release series.

The ssl module changes are included in this proposal to bring the Python 2 series up to date with the past 4 years of evolution in network security standards, and make it easier for those standards to be broadly adopted in both servers and clients. Similarly the hash algorithm availability indicators in hashlib are included to make it easier for applications to detect and employ appropriate hash definitions across both Python 2 and 3.

The hmac.compare_digest() and hashlib.pbkdf2_hmac() are included to help lower the barriers to secure password storage and checking in Python 2 server applications.

The os.urandom() change has been included in this proposal to further encourage users to leave the task of providing high quality random numbers for cryptographic use cases to operating system vendors. The use of insufficiently random numbers has the potential to compromise any cryptographic system, and operating system developers have more tools available to address that problem adequately than the typical Python application runtime.
