RFC 1958 [RFC1958] describes the underlying principles of the Internet architecture. This note extends that work by outlining some of the philosophical guidelines to which architects and designers of Internet backbone networks should adhere. While many of the areas outlined in this document may be controversial, the unifying principle described here, controlling complexity as a mechanism to control costs and reliability, should not be. Complexity in carrier networks can derive from many sources. However, as stated in [DOYLE2002], "Complexity in most systems is driven by the need for robustness to uncertainty in their environments and component parts far more than by basic functionality". The major thrust of this document, then, is to raise awareness about the complexity of some of our current architectures, and to examine the effect such complexity will almost certainly have on the IP carrier industry's ability to succeed.

The rest of this document is organized as follows: The first section describes the Simplicity Principle and its implications for the design of very large systems. The remainder of the document outlines the high-level consequences of the Simplicity Principle and how it should guide large scale network architecture and design approaches.

The Simplicity Principle, which was perhaps first articulated by Mike O'Dell, former Chief Architect at UUNET, states that complexity is the primary mechanism which impedes efficient scaling, and as a result is the primary driver of increases in both capital expenditures (CAPEX) and operational expenditures (OPEX). The implication for carrier IP networks then, is that to be successful we must drive our architectures and designs toward the simplest possible solutions.

The end-to-end argument, which is described in [SALTZER] (as well as in RFC 1958 [RFC1958]), contends that "end-to-end protocol design should not rely on the maintenance of state (i.e., information about the state of the end-to-end communication) inside the network. Such state should be maintained only in the end points, in such a way that the state can only be destroyed when the end point itself breaks." This property has also been related to Clark's "fate-sharing" concept [CLARK]. We can see that the end-to-end principle leads directly to the Simplicity Principle by examining the so-called "hourglass" formulation of the Internet architecture [WILLINGER2002]. In this model, the thin waist of the hourglass is envisioned as the (minimalist) IP layer, and any additional complexity is added above the IP layer. In short, the complexity of the Internet belongs at the edges, and the IP layer of the Internet should remain as simple as possible.

Finally, note that the End-to-End Argument does not imply that the core of the Internet will not contain and maintain state. In fact, a huge amount coarse grained state is maintained in the Internet's core (e.g., routing state). However, the important point here is that this (coarse grained) state is almost orthogonal to the state maintained by the end-points (e.g., hosts). It is this minimization of interaction that contributes to simplicity. As a result, consideration of "core vs. end-point" state interaction is crucial when analyzing protocols such as Network Address Translation (NAT), which reduce the transparency between network and hosts.

Complex architectures and designs have been (and continue to be) among the most significant and challenging barriers to building cost-effective large scale IP networks. Consider, for example, the task of building a large scale packet network. Industry experience has shown that building such a network is a different activity (and hence requires a different skill set) than building a small to medium scale network, and as such doesn't have the same properties. In particular, the largest networks exhibit, both in theory and in practice, architecture, design, and engineering non-linearities which are not exhibited at smaller scale. We call this Architecture, Design, and Engineering (ADE) non-linearity. That is, systems such as the Internet could be described as highly self-dissimilar, with extremely different scales and levels of abstraction [CARLSON]. The ADE non-linearity property is based upon two well-known principles from non-linear systems theory [THOMPSON]:

The Amplification Principle states that there are non-linearities which occur at large scale which do not occur at small to medium scale.

An important example of the Amplification Principle is non-linear resonant amplification, which is a powerful process that can transform dynamic systems, such as large networks, in surprising ways with seemingly small fluctuations. These small fluctuations may slowly accumulate, and if they are synchronized with other cycles, may produce major changes. Resonant phenomena are examples of non-linear behavior where small fluctuations may be amplified and have influences far exceeding their initial sizes. The natural world is filled with examples of resonant behavior that can produce system-wide changes, such as the destruction of the Tacoma Narrows bridge (due to the resonant amplification of small gusts of wind). Other examples include the gaps in the asteroid belts and rings of Saturn which are created by non-linear resonant amplification. Some features of human behavior and most pilgrimage systems are influenced by resonant phenomena involving the dynamics of the solar system, such as solar days, the 27.3 day (sidereal) and 29.5 day (synodic) cycles of the moon or the 365.25 day cycle of the sun.

In the Internet domain, it has been shown that increased inter-connectivity results in more complex and often slower BGP routing convergence [AHUJA]. A related result is that a small amount of inter-connectivity causes the output of a routing mesh to be significantly more complex than its input [GRIFFIN]. An important method for reducing amplification is ensure that local changes have only local effect (this is as opposed to systems in which local changes have global effect). Finally, ATM provides an excellent example of an amplification effect: if you lose one cell, you destroy the entire packet (and it gets worse, as in the absence of mechanisms such as Early Packet Discard [ROMANOV], you will continue to carry the already damaged packet).

Another interesting example of amplification comes from the engineering domain, and is described in [CARLSON]. They consider the Boeing 777, which is a "fly-by-wire" aircraft, containing as many as 150,000 subsystems and approximately 1000 CPUs. What they observe is that while the 777 is robust to large-scale atmospheric disturbances, turbulence boundaries, and variations in cargo loads (to name a few), it could be catastrophically disabled my microscopic alterations in a very few large CPUs (as the point out, fortunately this is a very rare occurrence). This example illustrates the issue "that complexity can amplify small perturbations, and the design engineer must ensure such perturbations are extremely rare." [CARLSON]
